
The food industry has perfected the idea of calorie in and calorie out.
They claim that as long as you "exercise" and burn off calories everything is well. Unfortunately, eating 100 calories Krispy Kreme vs 100 calories of an apple has completely different metabolic effect. In fact, if you want to live a healthy life, we have to kill calorie as a unit of measure.
Let's see why we need to view calorie and our health as a separate entity. 

Calorie is nothing more than the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of water by 1 degree celsius. 
Human metabolism is anything but simply raising the temperature. Specifically, metabolic process starts from the moment we ingest food from our mouth, which gets broken down into into tiny particles in our small intestine. Then, these molecules enter the blood streams to get assimilated into different cells so our mitochondria can produce ATP. 
The oversimplified nature of calorie fails to capture the fundamental dynamic of how we produce energy, misleading people to based their diet on calorie. For instance, if you eat 100 calories of Krispy Kreme original glazed donut, the refined carbs will rapidly dissolve into glucose, causing glucose spike in the blood. This will trigger insulin hormone to lower the glucose level in the blood. Frequent glucose spikes cause insulin resistance and lead to formation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs) that makes our blood vessels rigid and strict. This is the reason why diabetes is the number cause of kidney disease. The unhealthy fats from seed oils and trans fat (heating of oil) stimulate the spread of free radicals in our body, which plays major role in blood clotting. 
In sharp contract, eating 100 calories of apple does not trigger glucose spike thanks to apple's fiber. Plus, it is filled with various anti-oxidants that counters the spreads of free radicals in our body, which maintain balance in our body. Not only 100 calories, produce less ATP but also it cause a host of metabolic complication along the way. 
If you want to find how much heat energy a food has, by all means, use calorie. However, if your goal is to sleep well, avoid afternoon crash, and live happier life, focus on the quality of food.
Let's see how food companies use this misleading unit to sell ultra-processed food or industrialized produced edible substance.
Before we dive into the matter, we have to underscore the fact that just like any business, food industry's primary goal is to make profit.
That means food companies don't really care whether their chemical substance promote cancer cell growth or other chronic diseases like diabetes and kidney disease. 
People just don't develop chronic disease out of vacuum. These illnesses is closely linked with our lifestyle specifically what we consume on a daily basis spanned across multiple years if not decades. 
The sad and ugly truth is that food industry will do whatever it takes to maximize their profit. For example, Pepsi will hire food scientists to make their Dorito chips as addictive as possible. Specially, they are filled with addictive blend of salt and sugar with flavor-boosters like MSG and more. Each process has been carefully engineered by food scientists to create the mouth watering magic. It is no surprise that when you open a bag of Doritos, you must finish the entire bag of chips. These chemicals directly touch our brain to crave more products that cause binge eating and other metabolic complication. 
The food industries deceptively emphasize the macro nutrients and calorie on the label so consumer focus on this giant term that effectively tells nothing about the food. 
Knowing the main incentive of food business, we must take ownership of our health. 
The first and the most important thing is to educate yourself. Do you know what carbs found in ultra-processed food essentially have the same effect as sugar? Do you know why you experience afternoon crash? Do you know what glucose spike does to your body, especially to your micro vessels?
Medical doctors use complicated words and prescription names that add unnecessary confusion but these questions are pretty simple to answer. Furthermore, the more you study about nutrition and how our body assimilate into our cell, the more we can experiment with our body to find the ideal diet for us. The reason why there are so many conflicting diet information on social media is that everyone reacts different to food. By educating yourself, you can navigate through the massive pool of data, experiment with your body to find optimal diet just for you.
Secondly, start reading actual ingredients on the label. Calorie and macronutrients are just umbrella terms that don't reveal much about the food. When I was in college, I would simply glance over at the added sugar and calorie. I thought to myself, well this product has has little added sugar and the calorie is low so this must be healthy. Despite consuming the "recommend" calories per day, I didn't feel satiated, which frequently led to binge eating. On top of that, I was having lots of acne and bloating on my face. I spent lots of money to purchase best skin care products to treat the symptoms. When I became aware of calorie myth, I realized I was eating food essentially devoid of nutrition, which explains constant feeling of hunger. When I started eating whole foods, not only my food cravings went down but my skin problems also went away. These UPF was the root cause of all my metabolic problems. 
I understand reading ingredient list can be overwhelming initially but a good rule of thumb is that if the ingredient is not found in your kitchen, it's usually best to avoid them or replace UPF with whole food free of labels!
Whether you know it or not, we are paying the price for our ignorance. 
It's time to open our eyes and protect ourselves from lies. 
