The food industry has the perfected the idea of calorie in and calorie out. 

They claim as long as you "exercise" and burn off calories all is well. Unfortunately, eating 100 calories of krispy kreme vs 100 calories of an apple has completely different metabolic effect. In fact, if you want to live a healthy life, we have to kill calorie as a unit of measure.

Let's see why we need to view calorie and our health as a separate entity.

Calorie is nothing more than the amount of heat energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of water by 1 degree celsius. 

Human metabolism is anything but simply raising the temperature. Specifically, human metabolism starts from the moment we ingest food from our mouth which then gets broken down into tiny particles in our small intestines for the molecules to enter the blood streams which then gets assimilated into our cells so our mitochondria can produce ATP. 

Calorie tells nothing about the quality or contents of a food. This oversimplified nature of calorie fails to capture the complex nature human metabolism and the fundamental dynamic of how we actually produce energy. For instance, if you consume 100 calories of krispy kreme donut, the refined carbs will be quickly be absorbed in our blood stream which will trigger the release of insulin. Excess amount of glucose lead to formation of AGEs with other proteins in the body which makes our blood vessels rigid and strict, causing various microvascular disease. Adding insult to injury, unhealthy saturated fats and trans fat from heating up seed oils cause oxidative stress causing systematic inflammation. Due to poor quality of highly-processed, not only the actual ATP lower but it cause a host of other health problems along the way. In sharp contract, eating 100 calories of apple does not trigger glucose spike because the apple's fiber forms barrier in our intestine to slow down the absorption plus it is filled with various anti-oxidants that remedy oxidative stress, which results in balance and more energy in our body. 

So, if you want to find out literally how much heat energy a food has use calorie. However, if your goal is to sleep well, concentrate better, live a happier life, focus on the actual ingredients. 

Let's see how food companies hide behind this misleading metrics to sell literal junks. 

Just like any business, food industry's primary goal is to make profit.

People totally underestimate this misalignment of interest. Food companies don't care whether we are increasing the pace of cancer cell growth or promoting other chronic diseases like diabetes or chronic kidney disease. 

We don't just develop cancer overnight. Most of the chronic diseases come from our lifestyle diet spanned across years. The sad and ugly truth is that food conglomorate will literally hire food scientists to make their products more addictive and sensational so that people will endless crave their products.
